In this section we're going to be focusing on permanent data storage.
So looking at a number of different ways of storing data permanently in your app will also of course
be building a couple of real apps to try that out including a Notes app and a news reader app.
We're going to start with the most simple way to store data permanently and that's using something called
Shared preferences.
So I'm going to start a new project for this.
So shared preferences as is implied by the name
is a way of storing just very simple short items of data.
So ideally just strings like a username or indeed a preference that the user has selected for your app.
So we're going to see how to use shared preferences to store and restore data.
And finally we're going to complete the memorable places app by adding permanent storage to it using
shared preferences shared preferences is great for storing just little bits of information but if you
want to start storing lots of information such as a selection of emails or tweets or something like
that then there are better ways to do it using databases which we'll look at later on in this section.
OK.
Here we go.
So this is our shared preferences app I'm in.
Main activity Java.
I'm going to start writing code in here straight off.
So you shared preferences.
We create a variable of a type of shared preferences
we'll call it shared preferences.
And we create this from the context so from the main activity so we use this datt get shared preferences
and then we have to give it the name of the app.
So fortunately it's saved for us then for us as package.
So I just copy and paste that right in.
And then we need to give a context and we want only our app to access this data.
So we're going to use node private.
Now I mean only our app can access the data that we're saving here.
It is possible to share bits of data between apps using shared preferences but usually we just want
to save it and then get some information back about our app.
OK.
Or just run it in the background where we're going now to save an item in shared preferences.
We use our shared preferences variable and then we want to edit the shared preferences and you can see
we can put a range of variable types in but this is the only variable types that we can save.
So for now we'll put a string and then we give a name for the variable.
So call this username
and then a value for the variable.
So for example ROP and then to the end of that command
we put the instruction apply
and that will do the saving process for us and then to get it back we'll create a string called use
again to sort of use a name.
And then we just use shared preferences that get string
and then we give the name of the variable that we want to get.
And we also give a default value.
So if there isn't a user name saved even though we know that there is if there isn't one then the default
value here is just going to be an empty string.
So just like we did with the put extra and the Get in extra in the previous section we put a default
value.
We'll get if our value doesn't exist and then we'll just log
the results so we can see it in action.
So call it username and then use a name.
So let's run the app and take a look at the logs.
And here we go.
And you can see that that these name Rob has indeed been restored from shared preferences.
Just to prove that that has indeed been stored permanently I'm going to jump over to the app and shut
it down by double tapping on the square and closing down the app and then I'm going to comment out the
part of the code that saves the string in shared preferences and then we'll just run it again and we
should get exactly the same result which will prove that the username and shared preferences were stored
permanently.
And here we go.
You can see it right there.
Once again brilliant.
So that's more or less all there is to saving items with shared preferences.
But I did mention at the end of the last section that the challenge here was going to be converting
our memorable places app to permanent storage using shared preferences.
That's going to be a bit tougher than just saving a string because we want to save our array lists permanently.
So I'm going to show you how to do that and then I'll give you the challenge of updating memorable places
to store data permanently.
So first off I'm just going to comment out I have got so far.
And then we'll create an array list to save.
This will be called friends which should be familiar.
And then as before we'll add Monaca
and John le and we'll just leave it there we only really need to to prove that point.
Now you will have noticed that shared preferences are limited with the types of data that we can store.
So one option is to convert our data into a string set.
But the problem with that is we lose the order of the data which is important to us.
So I'm going to do a process called serialization which is a bit like converting something to Jason
essentially converts it to a string so that we can save it as a string in shared preferences.
To do that I'm going to import a new class.
This is something we haven't done before.
So it's a good thing to see so we're going to import a new Java class.
And this is going to be called object Serializer and object Serializer is a standard class provided
by Apache but I've made a very slightly edited version which just works slightly smoother with Android
and you can get that at Android.
Of course dot com slash object Serializer Drage DML if you want to see the original then just google
object Serializer Java and it'll pop right up.
You can see that mine is very similar.
I've just changed the exceptions really to work with Android studio.
So we're then going to delete everything here in this class.
Apart from the package name at the top and then paste it all in.
That should work absolutely fine.
Now we've got this class.
I'm not going to worry about what the code is doing precisely essentially just converting our
array list into a string.
So now we can edit our shared preferences and put a string again and this time I'll call the string
friends and the string that we're gonna save is object Serializer dot serialise and then we're going
to serialize the object friends
and then as before we'll apply that.
Now this is something that could fail.
So we're going to surround it by try and catch.
And then we need to try and restore that into a new array list.
So let's do that down here.
So we'll create a new array list of strings which are called new friends.
So initially that will just be an empty list and then we're going to set it equal to.
And this is where we're going to bring our data back from shared preferences and we're going to use
the object Serializer and this time we're going to serialize I we're going to convert it from a string
to our array list object.
And the thing that we want to serialize is what we say earlier so that shared preferences get string
and friends and then we need to have a secondary string.
So we could leave it as an empty string.
But the problem with that is if we do actually get no response from our shared preferences then trying
to realize an empty string will give us an error.
So I'm going to create a serialized empty array list so we use objects Serializer to serialize and then
we'll just create a new array list
of strings
just like that.
So that looks slightly confusing but all we're really doing is creating a new serialise empty array
list.
So then if we get an error over here we're going to d serialize that serialized array list which would
just create an empty arriviste make sense.
Hopefully some of that same issue was before that we need to surround it with try and catch in case
it fails.
And also this time this will return just a generic object.
So we need to cast it to an array list of strengths
that we get and then we'll log
new friends.
And we're converted to a string so it can be locked.
And we should see them the results come back.
So that's a slightly fiddly process we're converting to a string using the object serializer.
And then we're converting back again.
I seem to have an error somewhere.
I guess I've forgotten
a semi-colon
so just check this works.
We should now find that it saves the array list friends in a serialized form and then brings it back.
DC realizes it and log's it has an array list.
And there it is.
You just it just past fantastic manicuring generally you can see it's in the same order which is what
we want.
And again convince ourselves
that if I comment out the part of the code that saves that array list I still get the result and that
will mean that it's saved permanently.
And there it is.
Wonderful.
So again it's a bit of a faff but it does the job and generally being able to convert objects to strings
is useful in a number of different instances.
It's worth being aware of the object serializer.
All right now it's the big challenge for this video.
So we're going back over the memorable places and your challenge is to add permanent storage to the
memorable places app.
Best of luck.
Go for it.
All right.
Here we get them.
So I'm going to start by adding my new object Serializer Java class.
And I'm going to paste in code so I can use the object serializer.
And then let's think about the two places that we're going to need to use permanent storage.
So one is when we're getting the data back at the beginning of the create method in the main activity
and the other is where we're saving items at the bottom of the maps activity.
So I'm going to start by saving items.
So let's begin by using your preferences so it will create a variable again co-chaired preferences which
is going to be created from this activity and we're going to get shared preferences.
For the app package come to what Percival thought memorable places.
Package name are probably be different.
And then we'll use
private mode again.
Only our app can access the data and then to save the places or at list we'll use shared preferences
at it don't put strain and we'll save it as places and then we use the object Serializer to serialize
the data and the data that we want to serialize is main activity dot places
then we'll add in try catch and don't forget they apply at the end.
Easily done saving the locations is a little bit trickier because they are saved as Lachlan's which
we can save in shared preferences.
So we're going to convert those to strings and save them separately as latitude and longitude as so
to do that we're going to loop through.
So we're looking for that Lind's
which I'll call coordinates and we're looking for all the coordinates in main activity dot locations
then we're going to create separate array lists for each for latitude and longitude.
So let's see that's
latitudes which is a new array list and same
for longer cheat's
then
each of the lungs will take latitudes and add
and we want to add coordinates dot latitude but we need to convert that to a string.
So we use double dots to string
to do that and same for longer cheats and cheats.
And we won't see
use coordinates longer at this time.
We still want to convert it to a string
that we gave.
So now we can use our shared preferences again and this time I'll just copy and paste.
So we're putting latitudes
and this time we want to serialize the latitude variable and then longer cheat's what we call long and.
All right.
So now everything should be saved permanently.
We now just need to restore it from the permanent storage.
So let's set up our shared preferences again will it share preferences.
We're pretty familiar with this by now.
So this dog get shared preferences and then the package name
and then contact stopped made private and we start with places.
So Plett set places equal to and now we're restoring.
So we use object Serializer to serialize shared preferences don't get string and the string want to
get is places
and the back up as before will be a serialized empty string or empty list
every gay forget the semi-colon and let's add an hour try catch.
And finally of course we need to combat that.
To a very list of strings.
All right.
So that's fine for places but for the slightly trickier locations we're going to need to create new
array lists.
For latitudes
and also for long Michie's
OK so let's copy our places code
and then we'll set latitudes and this can be exactly the same except we're looking for the latitude
object in shed preferences.
And same for long and cheat's
OK.
We're nearly there.
So now we're going to check to see if we've actually got some data here from permanent storage because
it might be that they haven't saved anything yet.
So if
place is not size is greater than zero.
And
attitudes to us size is greater than zero.
And long cheat's size is greater than zero.
That means we have some data.
Now there is a very small chance that something's gone wrong and we don't have the same number of places
latitude and longitude as if that's the case our app is definitely going to give some errors at some
point.
So I'm going to do a check to see if places talk size is equal to a latitude star size and latitudes
but size is equal to long dot size and only then what we process everything.
Otherwise we might well try and create a location for something where we've only got a latitude for
some reason not that that should ever happen but it's always good to check for these things.
So if this is the case then all is well.
So we're going to loop through both latitudes and long and shoots.
Easiest way to do that is to follow up with a counter variable starting at zero.
And GARING until
we get to latitudes size which is of course the same as places size and longitude size.
Adding one to each time.
And then we want to take locations and add to it a new learn.
I'm going to create that from latitudes get I.
And look at us get I see.
I mean each of those.
But of course these are both strings.
So we're going to need to convert them to doubles
which we do using double pass double
that we get.
Now a final thing to check or to do really is initially to set places
as well as latitudes and longer cheat's
and indeed locations to empty array lists just in case the items are already saved there.
We want to restore these items and put them on top of what's already saved.
We want to essentially start from scratch each time.
OK.
If of course there aren't any places saved that we want to do what we did before.
Which is to add this initial place in or rent them.
So let's give it a gay
Essentially there were two things to learn there.
One is how to use shared preferences to store data permanently within a reasonably complex app.
But another is also that shared preferences is not necessarily the ideal solution and will use shared
preferences.
In our first big app of this section which will be a note taking app but we won't use it later on and
we'll see the advantages and disadvantages of shared preferences versus databases which we'll see how
to use later on.
And here we are.
I've actually cheated slightly and you can see that everything's working because I've already saved
a new place but let's just pivot to ourselves.
So add a new place that's OK for Biggleswade this time so long press and then that will save that location.
And we've got a nice address there as well.
So going back OK it's displaying it then that's great.
But we want to be sure that it's saved it permanently so double tap on the square and then we'll close
down the app and then run it again.
From Android studio
and with any luck we'll see that those two items now have been saved permanently.
And there they are fantastic of course if I click on that one then it will take me to that particular
location in the lovely town of Pickle's way am.
So now we have permanent storage in memorable places.
But do bear in mind that it wasn't that straightforward and if I wanted to do anything more complicated
with my permanent storage it would probably be a bit of a nightmare.
So we're going to start by seeing how good shared preferences can be for an app like Notes app and then
we'll go on and look at databases as an alternative before we build our nights out.
We're going to see two new features that are useful in all sorts of different Android apps.
Firstly see how to customize the action bar.
And then we'll see how to use pop ups or alert dialogs in our apps.
We'll start with customizing the action bar in the next video.